Create guide for distributed tests (#1251)
grafana/k6-docs: src/data/markdown/translated-guides/en/07 Testing Guides/05 Running distributed tests.md

---

It has already been established that k6 can [run large load tests](/testing-guides/running-large-tests/) from a single instance, but what about _multiple instances running a single test_?

Several reasons why you may wish to run a distributed test include:

- Your [system under test](/misc/glossary/#system-under-test) (SUT) should be accessed from multiple IP addresses.
- A fully optimized node cannot produce the load required by your extremely large test.
- Kubernetes is already your preferred operations environment.

For scenarios such as these, we've created the [k6-operator](https://github.com/grafana/k6-operator).

## Introducing k6-operator
[k6-operator](https://github.com/grafana/k6-operator) is an implementation of the [operator pattern](/misc/glossary/#operator-pattern) in Kubernetes, defining [custom resources](/misc/glossary/#custom-resource) in Kubernetes.
The intent is to automate tasks that a _human operator_ would normally do; tasks like provisioning new application components, changing configurations, or resolving run-time issues.

The k6-operator defines the custom `K6` resource type and listens for changes to, or creation of, `K6` objects.

> Each `K6` object references a k6 test script, configures the environment, and specifies the amount of [parallelism](/misc/glossary/#parallelism) for a test run.

Author: I'll incorporate this but move the glossary link.

This can give you immediate feedback if you have errors in your script.

</Blockquote>

Let's go ahead verify our script is valid by performing a brief test:
```shell
k6 run test.js
```

We should see a successful execution and resulting output summary.

## 3. Add test scripts
In order for your test scripts to be run, they must be published into your cluster.
This can be done using [ConfigMap](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/configmap/) or [PersistentVolume](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) resources.

### Add as a ConfigMap
Using a `ConfigMap` is a quick and straightforward mechanism for adding your test scripts to Kubernetes.
The `kubectl` tool provides a convenient method to create a new `ConfigMap` from a local script.

Let's create our ConfigMap as `my-test` with the content of our `test.js` script we created in the previous step:

```shell
kubectl create configmap my-test --from-file test.js
```

<Blockquote mod="attention" title="">

Limitations exist on how large your test script can be when deployed within a `ConfigMap`.

> Kubernetes imposes a size limit of 1,048,576 bytes (1 MiB) for the data, therefore if your test scripts exceed this limit, you'll need to mount a `PersistentVolume`.

Author: I do have a link to the `ConfigMap` reference in the text just above this warning to drive folks to the reference documentation. 

I am a little apprehensive about adding this particular link to the size limit warning as the anchor is a "when you should consider using a ConfigMap"-type of section. I then thought about adding a link with the text "When should you use a ConfigMap," but then felt we were working too hard to incorporate that particular link to reiterate the limit. For that, I think we should omit the additional link 🤔.

Another thought...should we link to a related GitHub issue? https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/19781#issuecomment-1512262944

WDYT?

> Kubernetes imposes a size limit of 1,048,576 bytes (1 MiB) for the data, therefore if your test scripts exceed this limit, you'll need to mount a `PersistentVolume`.

Reviewer: It seems you've ended up adding the k8s link in the next paragraph :smile:
I suggest to resolve this for now :+1: (unless you prefer to change the link to Github issue one after all). I suspect we'll probably need to revise this part when there's a separate section for k6-operator docs and with fresh eyes at some point.

At this time, installation does require having the project source code downloaded onto your system.
Installation commands must be run from the source directory.

<Blockquote mod="note" title="Prerequisites">

Besides privileged access to a Kubernetes cluster, installation will require that the system performing the installation has the following tools installed: 
- [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)
- [Go](https://go.dev/doc/install)
- [Kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl)
- [Kustomize](https://kubectl.docs.kubernetes.io/installation/kustomize/)
- [Make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/).

</Blockquote>

From your command-line, execute the following:
```shell
git clone https://github.com/grafana/k6-operator && cd k6-operator
```
Ensure that your `kubectl` tool is set for the appropriate Kubernetes cluster.
Then, from the `k6-operator` directory, you may now perform the installation:
```shell
make deploy
```
By default, the operator will be installed into a new namespace, `k6-operator-system`.
You can verify the successful installation by listing available resources within the namespace, ensuring the status is `Running`:
```shell

> kubectl get pod -n k6-operator-system

Author: I do like showing the output of some commands within the code blocks, however, readers are able to use the copy button from the code block, which would then copy the result as well. I can create a second code block with the result while removing the copy button from the UI.

</Blockquote>

You should see confirmation with `configmap/my-test created`.

### Add inside a PersistentVolume
Setting up a `PersistentVolume` is beyond the scope of this guide, but enables access to a shared filesystem from your Kubernetes cluster.

When using this option, organize your test scripts in the applicable filesystem just as you would locally.
This mechanism is ideal when breaking up monolithic scripts into reusable [modules](/using-k6/modules/).

<Blockquote mod="note" title="As seen on k6 Office Hours">

Organizing your test scripts was part of the discussion during [episode #76](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zDtEzp_JUOE&utm=k6-guides) of k6 Office Hours.

</Blockquote>

<Blockquote mod="attention" title="">

When using a `PersistentVolume`, the operator will expect all test scripts to be contained within a directory named `/test/`.

</Blockquote>

To learn more about creating `PersistentVolume` resources, review the [Kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/).

## 4. Create a custom resource

> During [installation](#install-the-operator), the `K6` [Custom Resource](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/) was added to the Kubernetes API.
> The data we provide in the custom resource contains all the information necessary for the k6 operator to start a distributed load test.
> 
> The main elements defined within the `K6` resource relate to the name and location of the test script to run, and the amount of [parallelism](/misc/glossary/#parallelism) to utilize.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During [installation](#install-the-operator), the `K6` [Custom Resource definition](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/) was added to the Kubernetes API.
The data we provide in the custom resource `K6` object should contain all the information necessary for the k6-operator to start a distributed load test.

Specifically, the main elements defined within the `K6` object relate to the name and location of the test script to run, and the amount of [parallelism](/misc/glossary/#parallelism) to utilize.
```
Explanation: here, I thought it'd be nice to clarify what is being installed automatically during "installation of operator" step VS what a user is supposed to define themselves. Otherwise, it sounds as if user is supposed to define CRD itself - which is not true.

Author: > It seems you've ended up adding the k8s link in the next paragraph 😄

😄 yes...I continued to work with it after the initial reply.

```yaml
apiVersion: k6.io/v1alpha1
kind: K6
metadata:
  name: run-k6-from-configmap
spec:
  parallelism: 4
  script:
    configMap:
      name: my-test
      file: test.js
```

</CodeGroup>

Recall when the script was [added as a ConfigMap](#add-as-a-configmap) for our configuration values.
We created the ConfigMap named `my-test`. 
The test script content was added to the map using the filename as the key-value, therefore the `file` value is `test.js`.

The amount of `parallelism` is up to you; how many pods do you want to split the test amongst?
The operator will split the workload between the pods using [execution segments](/misc/glossary/#execution-segment).

<Blockquote mod="attention" title="">

It is important that the `ConfigMap` and `CustomResource` are created in the same [Namespace](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/namespaces/).

</Blockquote>

### Script in a PersistentVolume
If the test script to be executed is contained within a `PersistentVolume`, creation of a [PersistentVolumeClaim](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#persistentvolumeclaims) will be required.

> We won't go into the details of PersistentVolumes and PersistentVolumeClaims, but to learn more, you should review the [Kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/).

Reviewer: Shouldn't this part be in the [Add inside a PersistentVolume](#add-inside-a-persistentvolume) subsection, above? When I read through, it seems like a repeat of info in that subsection but more precisely formulated...

Author: I'll include mention of `PersistentVolumeClaim` when accessing data on a `PersistentVolume`.

I didn't originally include the need for PVC in the earlier section because that particular section strictly deals with _adding_ your test scripts versus _using_ your test scripts. Since the latter section requires the need for PVC, I add the more precise usage.

I've played around with the text a bit for the former section...let me know what you think.

<Blockquote mod="note" title="">

Be sure to visit the [options reference](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/k6-options/reference/) for a listing of available options.

</Blockquote>

## 5. Run your test

Tests are executed by applying the custom resource `K6` to a cluster where the operator is running.
The test configuration is applied as in the following:

```shell
kubectl apply -f /path/to/your/k6-resource.yaml
```

After completing a test run, you need to clean up the test jobs created. 
This is done by running the following command:

```shell
kubectl delete -f /path/to/your/k6-resource.yaml
```

<Blockquote mod="note" title="Best Practice">

If you make use of [real-time results output](/results-output/real-time/), e.g. [Prometheus Remote Write](/results-output/real-time/prometheus-remote-write/), use the `cleanup` option to automatically remove resources upon test completion as with the following example:

```yaml
apiVersion: k6.io/v1alpha1
kind: K6
metadata:
  name: run-k6-with-realtime
spec:
  parallelism: 4
  # Removes all resources upon completion
  cleanup: post
  script:
    configMap:
      name: my-test
      file: test.js
  arguments:  -o experimental-prometheus-rw

> ```

Reviewer: This example is great, thanks! Btw, it's the first time we have it documented: its absent even in Readme ATM :smile:
